From and after October 8, 1997 @ 5:10pm 241292 
RECORDED IN LIBER 17667, 
Pages 119-138 
Lynn D Allen 
Clerk/Register of Deeds 
DECLARATION OF COVENANTS, CONDITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS 
BIRCHWOOD PARK NO. 2 
WEST BLOOMFIELD TOWNSHIP, OAKLAND COUNTY, MICHIGAN 
THIS DECLARATION OF COVENANTS, CONDITIONS, AND RESTRICTIONS (hereinafter referred to as the “Declaration”) is made this 6th day of October, 1997, by Great Oaks Subdivision Limited Partnership, a Michigan limited partnership (hereinafter referred to as the “Declarant”), whose address is 31550 Northwestern Highway, Ste., 200, Farmington Hills, Michigan 48334. 
WITNESSETH: 
WHEREAS, Declarant is the owner of certain real property located in West Bloomfield Township, Oakland County, State of Michigan, as legally described on Exhibit A, which real property has been platted and is now known as Birchwood Park No. 2 in accordance with a Plat recorded in Liber 251, Pages 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 and 20, Oakland County Records (“Subdivision”); and 
WHEREAS, Declarant desires to impose upon the Subdivision (but not any property outside of the Subdivision, whether or not owned by Declarant) covenants, conditions, restrictions, easements, charges and liens in order to insure the most beneficial development of the Subdivision as a single-family residential area, to prevent any use thereof which might tend to diminish its valuable or pleasurable enjoyment, and to assure the harmony, attractiveness and utility thereof, to provide for Lot Owners in the Subdivision to bear certain expenses, to impose other rights and obligations as set forth below, to provide for the preservation of certain services and facilities for the Subdivision and the permanent maintenance of such facilities by an Association comprised of Lot Owners in the Subdivision, to establish an Association to which shall be delegated the powers and responsibility to maintain and administer the facilities and certain Common Areas, which Association shall also be empowered to administer and enforce the covenants, conditions, restrictions, easements, charges and liens as set forth in this Declaration and to collect and disburse the assessments and charges hereinafter set forth. 
NOW, THEREFORE, Declarant hereby declares that the Subdivision and each and every Lot therein shall be held, sold, transferred and conveyed subject to the following covenants, conditions, easements, charges and liens which shall run with the Subdivision and each and every Lot therein and shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of all parties having any right, title or interest in the Subdivision or any part thereof, their liens, successors and assigns.
ARTICLE I 
DEFINITIONS 
As used in this Declaration, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
A. Architectural Control Committee. “Architectural Control Committee” shall mean the committee appointed in accordance with the provisions of Article VIII below. 
B. Area of Common Responsibility. “Area of Responsibility” shall mean and refer to the Common Areas (as hereinafter defined), together with those areas. If any, within or upon a Lot, the maintenance, repair or replacement of which shall be the responsibility of the Association. 
C. Association. “Association” shall mean the Birchwood/Springmeadow Park Homeowners Association, a Michigan nonprofit corporation to be organized for a perpetual term by the Declarant and in which all Lot Owners shall be Members. 
D. Common Areas. “Common Areas” shall mean and refer to Birchwood Park, which is a private park, and all other areas of land, if any, denoted as “Private Parks” on the recorded Plat of the Subdivision. “Common Areas” shall also mean and refer to any other areas intended to be owned by the Association and to be devoted to the common use and enjoyment of the Lot Owners, any improvements thereon and other areas such as the “Landscaping and Signage Areas” (defined below) and any other common landscaped areas, bicycle paths, boulevard medians, green belts along roads, walkway easements, cul-du-sac islands, storm water detention areas, storm sewers and appurtenances not in County dedicated rights of way and detention areas, if any, all recreational amenities, and all areas of the Subdivision not privately owned or which may be transferred to the Association from time to time. "Common Areas'' include sidewalks in the Parks or built in a public right-of-way adjacent to a Park, but do not include the sidewalks which the Lot Owners are individually responsible for as provided in Article VII, paragraph L, of this Declaration. Declarant may, from time to time, transfer any portion of the Subdivision to the Association. Such transfer shall be effective to convey all or any portion of the interest of Declarant to the Association who shall be deemed to have accepted such conveyance and who shall maintain said property as herein provided. 
E. Dwelling. "Dwelling" shall mean a single -family residential dwelling. 
F. Landscaping and Signage Areas. "Landscaping Areas" shall mean the areas described as "private easement for landscaping" on the Plat of the Subdivision, being part of Lots 63, 83, 106 and 188. The private easement for landscaping over Lots 63 and 188, as shown on the Plat, includes, for the benefit of all Lots in the subdivision, the reserved right of the Associations to install, maintain, repair and replace entry signage for the Subdivision.
G. Lot. "Lot" shall mean any lot within the Subdivision, as such Lots are set forth in the Plat of the Subdivision. 
H. Lot Owner. "Lot Owner" shall mean the holder of record title to a Lot, whether one or more persons or entities, and shall include any optionees or land contract vendees of the Lot. Optionees or land contract vendees of Lots owned by the Declarant shall not be considered Lot Owners, and shall have no voting rights hereunder. The term "Lot Owner" shall not include any mortgagees unless and until such mortgagees shall have acquired fee simple title to such Lot by foreclosure or other proceeding or conveyance in lieu of foreclosure and shall not include any interest in a Lot held as security for the performance of any obligation. In the event more than one person or entity owns an interest in the fee simple title to any Lot, or has an interest as an optionee or a land contract vendee (other than Lots owned by Declarant), the interests of all such persons collectively shall he that of one Lot Owner, Notwithstanding the foregoing, the optionee or land contract vendee of any Lot (including Lots owned by Declarant) shall be responsible for the payment of all assessments and charges imposed pursuant to this Declaration. 
I. Member. “Member” shall mean all Lot Owners who are members of the Association as hereinafter provided. 
J. Structure. “Structure” shall mean any building, driveway, parking area, structure, Dwelling, garage, shed, outbuilding, fence, wall, gazebo, hedge, or any other improvement whether temporary or permanent in nature. 
K. Subdivision. “Subdivision” shall mean the real property described in Exhibit “A” attached hereto and made a part hereof. 
L. Township. “Township” shall mean and refer to WEST BLOOMFIELD TOWNSHIP, Oakland County, Michigan.
ARTICLE II 
PROPERTY SUBJECT TO THIS DECLARATION 
The real property which is subject to and shall be held, transferred, sold, conveyed and occupied pursuant to this Declaration is more particularly described in Exhibit A attached hereto and made a part hereof, and includes what hundred 20 six (126) Lots plus the Common Areas. The Association shall further have the right to combine with any other subdivision associations which may be formed by the owners of the Lots in any subdivision previously created by Great Oaks Subdivision Limited Partnership (or any entity affiliated with, or related to, Great Oaks Subdivision Limited Partnership) in the Township. Such combination of subdivisions shall be effective only after approval by the Great Oaks Subdivision Limited Partnership or, after conveyance of more than ninety (90%) percent of the Lots in the Subdivision, by the holders of two-thirds (2/3) of all Members of the Association. All owners of lots in such other subdivisions and all owners of Lots in this Subdivision shall have reciprocal rights of access for the use and enjoyment of all Common Areas in this Subdivision and in the other subdivisions, subject to payment of fees therefore in accordance with Article V below. Anything to the contrary contained herein notwithstanding, any property which is not described on Exhibit A may only be combined with the Association or otherwise annexed and incorporated into this Agreement with the consent of the owner of the property to be so annexed and incorporated.
ARTICLE III 
ASSOCIATION MEMBERSHIP AND VOTING RIGHTS 
A. Membership. Every Lot Owner shall be a Member of the Association. Membership in the Association shall be appurtenant to and may not be separated from the ownership of any Lot which is subject to assessment hereunder. Optionees or land contract vendees of Declarant shall not be Members of the Association, but shall be fully responsible for all assessments and charges imposed hereunder against the Lots purchased. No Lot Owner, whether one or more persons, shall have more than one (1) membership per Lot owned. In the event a Lot Owner is more than one person or entity, votes and rights of use and enjoyment shall be as provided herein. 
B. Voting Rights. Each Member shall be entitled to one (1) vote for each Lot owned. When more than one person or entity holds an interest in any Lot (“multiple ownership”), all such persons shall be Members but in no event shall there be more than one vote cast with respect to any such Lot. When more than one person or entity holds an interest in any Lot, such vote shall be exercised as the holders of such interests may, among themselves, agree and they shall so notify the Association in writing prior to any vote. Where a Lot is subject to multiple ownership, and the Lot Owners fail or refuse to notify the Association of the manner in which the multiple owners shall exercise their single vote within fifteen (15) days of the date set for the meeting, then and in such event the Lot Owner whose name first appears on record title shall be deemed Member authorized to vote on the behalf of all the multiple Lot Owners and any vote cast in person or by proxy by said Lot Owner or the failure of said Lot Owner to vote shall be binding conclusive on all such multiple Lot Owners. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no Member, other than Declarant, shall have the right to vote on Association matters, and the Declarant shall have the exclusive right to establish bylaws for the Association, to appoint the Board of Directors of the Association, and to amend this Declaration, all in Declarant’s sole and absolute discretion, until the earlier to occur of: (a) such time as title to not less than ninety (90%) percent of the Lots in the Subdivision and the lots in any other subdivision combined with the Subdivision pursuant Article II have been conveyed by Declarant’s delivery of deeds thereto; and (b) such time as Declarant shall execute and deliver to the Association a written instrument executed by Declarant specifically relinquishing such exclusive voting rights. So long as the Great Oaks Subdivision Limited Partnership owns legal title to a Lot in the Subdivision, no amendment of this Declaration will be effective with the prior written consent of Great Oaks Subdivision Limited Partnership. From and after that earlier of such dates, the Board of Directors shall be elected by Members, and the declarant shall have no further responsibilities with respect to the Association except for its responsibilities as a Member of the Association so long as it remains a Lot Owner.
ARTICLE IV 
EASEMENTS AND PROPERTY RIGHTS IN THE COMMON AREAS 
A. Lot Owner’s Easement of Enjoyment. Every Lot Owner shall have a right and easement to use Common Areas for their intended purposes, and such easement shall be appurtenant to and shall pass with title to every Lot, subject to the Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions of this Declaration. 
B. Title to the Common Areas. Contemporaneous with the conveyance by deed of the first Lot in the Subdivision to a Member of the Association. Declarant shall convey the Common Areas to the Association, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, except easements and rights-of-way of record, and subjects to the Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions of this Declaration. 
C. Association’s rights in the Common Areas. The Association shall have the right to dedicate or transfer all or any part of the Common Areas to any public agency, authority for utility for such purposes subject to such conditions as may be agreed upon by the Lot Owners; provided, however, that any dedication, transfer, or determination as to the conditions thereof shall be effective only upon execution of an instrument signed by Clarence or, upon the conveyance of more than ninety (90%) percent of the Lots in the subdivision and the lots in any other subdivision combined with the Subdivision pursuant to Article II, by the holders of two-thirds (2/3) of all Members of the Association and which is recorded and confirms or approves such dedication, transfer, or determination; and further provided, however, that any dedication, transfer or determination as to the conditions thereof shall be effective only upon the prior consent thereto being received from the Township. The Association shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Subdivision Control Act of 1967, MCLA 560.101-560.293 (the “Subdivision Control Act”). Anything contained herein to the contrary notwithstanding, Declarant shall have the exclusive right, subject to compliance with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to any applicable provisions of the Subdivision Control Act, to grant public or private easements or rights-of-way to public or private utilities or governmental bodies in, over upon the Common Areas, prior to conveyance to the Association and the Association shall receive the same subject thereto. Declarant shall also have the right to create recreational amenities within the Common Areas as may be approved by the Township prior to conveyance to the Association. 
D. Birchwood Park Drainage District. The storm drainage facilities for the Subdivision have been established as county drain by agreement between Declarant and the Oakland County Drain Commissioner (acting for and on behalf of the Birchwood Park Drainage District). Certain of the Common Areas are subject to permanent easements for surface water drainage as part of the Birchwood Park County Drain. The cost of inspection, maintenance, repair and replacement of the Birchwood Park County Drain will be paid by the Lot Owners as provided in the Agreement between Declarant and the Oakland County Drain Commissioner recorded in Oakland County records.
ARTICLE V 
MAINTENANCE AND ASSESSMENT COVENANT 
A. Association Responsibilities. Except as hereinafter provided, the Association shall have the duty and responsibility to maintain the Common Areas for the benefit of the Subdivision. 
B. Lien and Personal Obligation for Assessment and Charges. Declarant, for and on behalf of each and every Lot owned within the Subdivision, does hereby covenant and agree and each Lot Owner by acceptance of a deed therefore whether or not it shall be set forth therein, is deemed to covenant and agree to pay the Association: (a) all annual assessments or charges when due; (b) special assessments, if any, for capital improvements to be established and collected as hereinafter set forth; (c) special assessments against individual Lot Owner for the cost of replacing any dead street trees on such Owner’s Lot pursuant to the procedure established in Article VII, paragraph Q below; and (d) charges assessed by the Township against the Subdivision or the Declarant which are direct or indirectly attributable to the construction of a home on the Lot as described in paragraph G of this Article V in paragraph I of the Article VII. Each Lot Owner covenants, agrees and accepts all of the terms, conditions, covenants and agreements hereof in accordance herewith. As provided in Article I above, the optionee or land contract vendee of any Lot shall be responsible for the payment of all assessments and charges imposed pursuant to this Declaration. 
C. Purpose of General Assessments. The purpose of the general assessments levied by the Association shall be for the repair, maintenance, operation, management and improvement of the Common Areas, including but not limited to the 
payment of all taxes and insurance thereon, the repair and replacement thereof, the operation thereof, additions thereto and improvements thereon, and for the cost of labor, equipment, materials, management and supervision for and conjunction therewith. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, in the event the Association fails or refuses to provide the necessary repairs, maintenance, operation, management and improvement of the Common Areas, then and in such event the Township shall have the right but not the obligation to assess all costs for the same under and pursuant to this Declaration in each Lot Owner consents to such assessment and agrees that such assessments shall be payable on demand to the Township. In addition to other methods of collection, the Township shall have the right to place such assessment on the Township tax rolls of the assessed property. 
D. Annual Assessments. Until January 1 of the year immediately following the first conveyance by Declarant of a Lot to a Lot Owner who is a Member of the Association, the maximum annual assessment shall be Two Hundred Dollars ($200) per Lot. 
1. From and after January 1 of the year immediately following the first conveyance by Declarant of a Lot to a Lot Owner who is a Member of the Association, the maximum annual assessment may be 
increased or decreased annually as may be determined by 
Declarant or, your conveyance more than ninety (90%) percent of 
the Lots in the Subdivision and the lots in any other subdivision
combined with the Subdivision pursuant to Article II, by a vote of 
two-thirds (2/3) of each of the Members of the Association who are voting in person or by proxy, at a meeting duly called for this 
purpose, as needed to pay all costs, expenses and charges to 
carry out its purposes hereunder. 
2. In the event membership does not or cannot agree on any change from and after January 1 of the year immediately following the first conveyance a Lot to a Lot Owner who is a Member of the 
Association, then and in such event the annual assessment shall 
continue at the rate of Two Hundred Dollars ($200) per Lot or such other annual rate hereafter established by Declarant pursuant to 
paragraph D.1. of this Article V; provided, however, that in the event of any annual deficit, the Board of Directors of the Association shall assess each Lot pro rata annually to pay any such deficits. 
E. Special Assessments. In addition the annual assessments provided for herein, the Association may levy special assessments applicable to an assessment year only for the purpose of defraying, in whole or in part, the cost of any construction, reconstruction, repair or replacement of a capital improvement to an Area of Common Responsibility, provided, however, that any such special assessment shall first be approved by two-thirds (2/3) of the votes of the Members who are voting in person or by proxy at a meeting duly called for this purpose. 
F. Uniform Assessment Rate. All annual, special and efficiency assessments shall be fixed and established at the same rate for all Lots. 
G. Charges for Compliance with Ordinances, Laws, Rules or Regulations and Street Cleaning. Each lot, during and immediately after construction on any Structure on the Lot, is subject to such charges as are necessary to defray the cost of street cleaning and to pay any other costs imposed by the Township on the Declarant or the Subdivision or any other governmental entity that are directly or indirectly related to construction activities on Lots in the Subdivision. Any cost imposed by the Township or any other governmental entity on the Declarant or the Subdivision that directly or indirectly relates to the construction activities on one or more Lots shall be assessed against, and shall be payable by, the Owners (or land contract or option purchasers from Declarant) of the Lots to which the costs are attributable. Any such costs shall be a lien assessed against the Lot as provided in Article V of this Declaration. 
H. Notice and Quorum. Written notice of any membership meeting called for any purpose hereunder shall be sent by first-class mail to all Members at least (30) days in advance of such meeting, and shall set forth the purpose thereof. At the first meeting of the Association, the presence of Members or proxies entitled to cast thirty-five (35%) percent of all votes of the Members shall constitute a quorum. In the event the required quorum is not present at such meeting, another meeting may be called, upon notice as set forth herein, and the required quorum at such subsequent meeting shall be fifty (50%) percent of the required quorum at the preceding meeting.
I. Commencement Date of Annual Assessments. The first annual assessment shall commence and be due for each Lot from the Owner on the date legal or equitable title is acquired by an Owner to such Lot. In the event of a land contract or option sales by Declarant, the land contract vendee or optionee shall be responsible for 
all assessments for the Lots sold on land contract or option from the date of the land contract or option. The amount of the annual assessment which shall be due for the first annual assessment shall be an amount which bears the same proportion to the annual assessment specified in paragraph D of this Article V as the remaining number of months in that year bears to twelve (12). The annual assessments for any year, after the first assessment year, shall become due and payable on the first day of January of each year; provided, however, but the Board of Directors, in its discretion may establish an installment program payment of the annual, special for deficit assessments and may charge interest in connection therewith, but each such assessment shall be and become a lien on each Lot on January 1 of each year after the initial year. 
J. Board of Directors’ Duties. Subject to the foregoing provisions, the Board of Directors of the Association, which shall consist of at least three (3) and not more than seven (7) persons, shall fix the amount of the assessments against each Lot for each assessment period at least thirty (30) days in advance of such date or period and shall prepare a roster of the Lots and the assessments applicable thereto to be maintained in the office of the Association and which shall be open to inspection by any Owner at all reasonable times. Written notice of the assessment shall thereupon be sent to every Owner subject thereto and the Association shall, upon demand in payment of a reasonable charge, furnish to any Owner liable for such assessment a certificate in writing signed by an officer of the Association, which states whether such an assessment has been paid and the amount of any due but unpaid assessments. 
K. Effect of Non-Payment of Assessments or Charges, Personal Obligation of the Owner and Liens and Remedies of the Association. In the event any assessment or charge is not paid on the due date then such an assessment or charge shall become delinquent and a lien therefore shall thereupon arise and shall, together with interest thereon and costs of collection therefor (as hereinafter provided), be and become a continuing lien of such Lot until paid in full, and such lien shall be binding upon the Lot, the Owner thereof in his or her errors heirs, personal representatives, successors and assigns. Such assessments and charges shall also be personal obligation and debt of each Lot Owner and shall be binding upon each Lot Owner to pay such assessments and remain the Lot Owner’s obligation and debt for the statutory period. Any successor or assign in or to title may obtain from the Association a written statement as to any unpaid assessments and charges on such Lot and such statement shall be binding upon the Association. In the event the assessment is not paid in full within thirty (30 )days after delinquency, the assessment shall bear interest from the date of delinquency at the rate of seven (7%) present per annum and the Association may bring an action at law against the Lot Owner personally obligated to pay the same or foreclose to lien against the Lot, and the cost of preparing and filing the complaint in such action and/or in connection with foreclosure shall be added to the amount of such assessment(s) and interest, and, in the event a judgment is obtained, the judgment shall include interest on the assessment(s) as above provided and reasonable attorney’s fees together with all costs and expenses of the action.
L. Subordination of the Assessment Lien to Mortgages. The lien of the assessments provided for herein shall be subordinate to the lien of any first mortgage and any sale or transfer of any Lot shall not affect the assessment lien; provided, however, that the sale or transfer of any Lot in connection with a mortgage foreclosure preceding or any proceeding in lieu thereof, shall extinguish the lien of the assessments, interest and charges due prior to such sale or transfer, but in no event shall prior Owner thereof be relieved of any liability whatsoever for such obligation and debt. No subsequent sale or transfer shall relieve such Lot from liability for any assessments, interest or charges which thereafter become due or from any lien therefor. 
M. Exemptions and Modification of Assessments. 
1. The Common Areas shall be exempt from regular assessments, special assessments of deficiency assessments and from and 
against any liens or encumbrances therefor. 
2. All Lots owned by Declarant shall be exempt from ninety (90%) percent of the annual assessments, special assessments and 
deficiency assessments. After conveyance of title to any Lot by 
Declarant to a Member or after Declarant’s sale of a Lot on land 
contract or option, this exemption for each Lot shall thereupon 
cease and such Lot shall then be liable for the prorated balance of that year’s established annual assessment and special 
assessment, if any; provided, however, that any Lots owned by 
Declarant shall not be exempt from assessments by the Township 
for real property taxes and other charges. 
3. The initial cost of development of the Common Areas for the purpose set forth on the Plat shall be borne and paid for by 
Declarant, and Declarant shall have no other obligation to construct improvements upon or develop any of the other Common Areas.
ARTICLE VI 
ARCHITECTURAL CONTROL 
A. No structure may be commenced, erected, installed, placed, or maintained upon any Lot unless or until the Lot Owner of such Lot has submitted the following documentation to the Architectural Control Committee (which shall be initially controlled by Declarant as provided in Article VIII) and the Architectural Control Committee has approved all of such documentation in writing: 
1. A topographic survey of the Lot prepared and certified by a licensed engineer or architect showing existing and proposed grades, and 
the proposed location of each Structure located or to be located 
upon the Lot. 
2. Construction and architectural plans prepared by a licensed engineer or architect including dimensioned floor plans, typical 
sections and all elevations for the Structure to be constructed upon or in the Lot. 
3. Specifications for each Structure setting forth the type and quality of all materials and workmanship and including a detailed finish 
schedule for all exterior materials, products and finishes, with the 
actual samples of all exterior materials. 
4. A construction schedule specifying the commencement and completion dates of construction of the Structures, as well as such other dates as the Architectural Control Committee may specify for completion of stages of the Structures. 
B. A Lot Owner (including land contract and option purchasers of Lots from Declarant) shall submit two copies of the aforedescribed documents to the Architectural Control Committee, and the Architectural Control Committee shall retain one copy of each document for its records. 
C. Declarant intends and desires that all Structures within the Subdivision be architecturally harmonious and architecturally pleasing and that the design and location of such Structures take into account the preservation of trees in the natural environment of the Subdivision. In order to ensure that such goals are accomplished, the 
Architectural Control Committee shall, in its sole discretion, have a right to approve or disapprove the appearance, construction, materials, proposed location, design, specifications or any other attribute of any Structure.
D. A lot owner may only construct, install or place upon a Lot those Structures that have been approved in writing by the Architectural Control Committee in the manner set forth herein. Before construction of any Dwelling or making any exterior improvements, change, or elevation change upon any Lot, an Owner shall receive the written approval of the Architectural Control Committee. No application for a building permit or application for any other governmental approval or construction shall be filed until written approval of the committee is received. No structure shall be erected by anyone other than a licensed residential builder. The Architectural Control Committee shall approve in advance the licensed residential builder engaged by the Owner to construct a Dwelling and any other improvements on the Owner’s Lot. The Architectural Control Committee may require such builder or Owner furnish to the Association adequate security, in the Architectural Control Committee’s sole discretion, to protect the Association against costs and expenses which it might incur in connection with the failure to complete construction in a timely and diligent manner in accordance with the approved plans and specifications for the Dwelling and other improvements. 
E. The following additional requirements, restrictions and regulations shall apply to all construction activities on Lots in the Subdivision unless waived in writing by the Architectural Control Committee: 
1. The Architectural Control Committee shall have the right to 
establish and enforce such rules and regulations relative to the 
performance of construction activities within the Subdivision 
(whether or not in connection with the construction, repair or 
maintenance of a Dwelling or other Structure) as the Architectural 
Control Committee determines to be appropriate in order to 
maintain the tranquility, appearance and desirability of the 
Subdivision. 
2. All construction activities must be started within two (2) months of the time specified in the construction schedule submitted to and 
approved by the Architectural Control Committee. Prior to 
commencement of construction, the Owner must obtain all permits or approvals required by the Township. 
3. The erection of any Dwelling shall be completed and the Dwelling ready for occupancy within twelve (12) months from start of 
construction. All Structures other than Dwellings shall be completed within three )3) months from start of construction. The exterior of all Dwellings and other Structures must be completed as soon as 
practical after construction commences, except where such 
completion is impossible or would result in great hardship to the 
Owner or builder due to strikes, fires, national emergency or natural calamities. The repair of any Structure damaged by fire or 
otherwise shall be completed as rapidly as possible and should the Owner leave such Structure in an incomplete condition for a period more than six (6) months, then Declarant, the Association, or their 
authorized representative, is authorized and empowered either to 
tear down and clear from the premises the uncompleted portion of 
the Structure, or to complete the same at their discretion, and in
either event, the expense incurred shall be charged against the 
Owner’s interest therein and shall be a lien upon said lands and 
premises as provided in Article V, above. 
4. Prior to the commencement of any construction activities relative to the building of a Dwelling on a Lot, the Owner of the Lot (or the land contract or option purchaser of the Lot from Declarant) shall post 
with the Declarant a Five Hundred Dollar ($500) deposit to ensure 
that during and after construction the road on which the Lot is 
located is maintained in a good and clean condition and free of any dirt, mud or other debris arising from the construction activities. 
The instructions for disposition of the deposit shall give the 
Declarant the discretion to determine whether or not the Owner of 
the Lot (or land contract or option purchaser of the Lot from 
Declarant) has complied with this paragraph. 
5. No approval by the committee shall be valid if the Structure or improvement violates any of the restrictions or requirements set 
forth in this Declaration, except in cases where waivers have been granted as provided for in the Declaration. 
6. The Committee may disapprove plans because of noncompliance with any of the restrictions or requirements set forth in Article VI 
and VIII of this Declaration, or because of reasonable 
dissatisfaction with the grading and drainage plan, the location of 
the Structure on the Lot, the materials used, the color scheme, the finish, design, proportions, shape, height, style or appropriateness 
of the proposed improvement or alteration or because of any matter or thing which, in the reasonable judgement of the Committee, 
would render the proposed improvement or alteration inharmonious or out of keeping with the objectives of the Committee or with 
Structures erected on other Lots in the Subdivision. 
F. The Architectural Control Committee shall have ten (10) days after the receipt of all required plans and specifications to issue a written approval or denial. If the Architectural Control Committee fails to issue a written approval or denial of the plans and specifications within the ten (10) day period, then written approval will not be required and the plans and specifications submitted shall be deemed to comply with this Article of Declaration. 
G. The Committee may charge a review fee, not to exceed Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($250), in connection with the review of plans and specifications for any Structure or combination of Structures on any Lot, or in regard to the substantial alteration of any Structure. The fee may not be utilized for the purpose of reimbursing the actual expenses of the Committee, including, without limitation, the professional fees of independent consultants to the Committee.
ARTICLE VII 
BUILDING, USE AND OTHER RESTRICTIONS AND EASEMENTS 
A. Residential Lots. No Lot subject hereto shall be used except for residential purposes. No Lot in the Subdivision shall be used or shall have any improvement made to it or erected upon in violation of the ordinances or requirements of Township or such other governmental entity as may have jurisdiction thereover. No Structure shall be erected, altered, placed or permitted to remain on any Lot subject hereto other than one (1) detached Dwelling which shall include an attached private garage (which shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height) for not more than three (3) cars for the sole use of the Owner or occupant of the Lot upon which such Dwelling and garage shall have been erected; provided, that each Dwelling constructed upon any Lot shall have at least a two (2) car garage attached thereto, constructed at the time of and in conjunction with construction of such Dwelling; and subject, further, to the additional Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions hereinafter set forth and imposed upon and against the Lots, or any portions thereof. 
B. Square Footage and Type of Construction. The Declarant intends and desires that all Structures within the Subdivision be architecturally harmonious and architecturally pleasing and that the design and location of such Structures take into account the preservation of trees and the natural environment of the Subdivision. All Dwellings within the Subdivision shall contain the following minimum square footage requirements: 
(i) single story: 1,600 square feet; 
(ii) one and one-half story: 1,800 square feet, with at least 1,000 square feet on the first floor; and 
(iii) Two story, bilevel or multilevel: 1,800 square feet, with at least 1,000 square feet on first floor. 
The square footage areas of any garage or basement shall not be included in computing whether the foregoing minimum square footage requirements have been met. The front elevator of each Dwelling will use brick, stone, or a combination of brick and stone for approximately one-third (1/3) of the front exterior wall of the Dwelling. The portion of the front wall area covered by brick or stone shall be calculated first determining the area of the front wall net of all windows, doors and area of architectural ornamentation and dividing the net front exterior wall area by the area covered by a brick or stone. All buildings shall be brick veneer, frame, vinyl or other generally acceptable building materials acceptable to the Declarant or any combination thereof. Aluminum siding is expressly prohibited.
C. Lot Size. No Lot shall be divided and/or reduced in size by the conveyance of a part thereof, or by use and/or addition of a part thereof in conjunction with or as part of any adjacent Lot to constitute a building site other than precisely as indicated within the recorded Plat of the Subdivision; provided, however, that if any of the Lots shall be altered and reduced in total area by the taking, use or purchase of a portion thereof for a public purpose by a public agency, this provision shall not apply to prohibit the construction of a Dwelling upon such Lot as reduced in size. 
D. Building Lines. No structure shall be placed, erected, installed or located on any Lot nearer to the front, side or near Lot line than the distance shown on the Plat and as permitted by the ordinances of the Township in effect at the time of installation of such Structure. Furthermore, all Structures shall meet the following setback requirements from the boundary lines of the Lot: 
1. The front yard setback line should be at least forty (40) feet. 2. The rear yard setback line shall be at least thirty-five (35) feet. 
3. The side yard setback line shall be at least twelve and one-half (12 ½) feet per side, and the combined total width of the two (2) side yards on any Lot shall not be in less than twenty-five (25) feet; provided, however, where a side yard is on the road or street side of a Lot, such side yard setback line shall not be less than thirty-two (32) feet. 
Front, rear and side yards smaller than above shall only be permitted if a variance from the setback or setbacks is granted by the Architectural Control Committee. A variance from the Township may also be necessary. Approval of a variance by the Architectural Control Committee of setbacks of less than those established above will be permitted if the grade, soil or other physical conditions pertaining to a Lot justify such variance. 
E. Trees. All Lot Owners (and land contract and option purchasers of any Lot from Declarant) shall comply with the Township’s woodlands ordinance then in effect, if any, in connection with any proposed tree removal. 
F. Nuisances. No noxious or offensive activity shall be carried on or upon any Lot, nor shall anything be done thereon which may be or become an annoyance to the other Lots or Lot Owners. 
G. Restrictions on the Use of Common Areas. 
1. Motor Vehicles. All vehicles propelled by a motor, other than those used for maintenance purposes, including but not limited to 
snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles, motorcycles, mo-peds, motor 
boats, automobiles, trucks and vans, are expressly prohibited from operation or storage in the Common Areas.
2. Structures. No wall, building or Structure may be constructed nor any development or improvement done in the Common Areas 
without the prior written consent and approval of the Architectural 
Control Committee and all government agencies having jurisdiction. 
3. Refuse and Storage. The Common Areas shall not be used as a dumping ground for storage or dispose of rubbish, trash, garbage 
or other materials. 
4. Pets. No shall allow the Owner’s dog or any other pet to run loose in the Common Areas. 
5. Use of the Common Areas. The Common Areas shall be used only for passive recreation and for no other purpose. Golfing and all other active sports are prohibited. Activities in the Common Areas 
shall be carried on in such a manner as to avoid disturbing or 
otherwise offending other Owners. No firearms, air rifles, pellet or 
B-B guns, bows and arrows, slingshots or other weapons are 
allowed in the Common Areas. 
6. Wild Life. No Owner shall permit or suffer the molestation or destruction of wild ducks, geese, birds or other harmless wild life in the Common Areas. 
7. Liability Insurance. The Association shall maintain liability insurance in sufficient amounts for the purpose of protecting itself 
the Owners, and the Declarant from the burden of liability resulting from accidents which may cause death or injury to anyone while in the Common Areas, or on property under the jurisdiction or control of the Association. 
8. Rules and Regulations. The Architectural Control Committee shall have the right to publish from time to time reasonable rules 
and regulations consistent herewith governing the use of the 
Common Areas as well as other matters relating thereto. 
H. Reservation of Rights. Declarant reserves for itself and for the Association and their respective agents the right to enter upon any Lot for the purpose of mowing, removing, clearing, cutting or pruning underbrush, weeds or any other unsightly growth, which in the opinion of the Declarant or the Association detracts from your overall beauty, setting and safety of the Subdivision. Such entrance for the purpose of mowing, cutting, clearing or pruning shall not be deemed a trespass. Declarant and the Association in their respective agents may likewise enter upon such land to remove any trash which has collected on such a Lot without such an entrance and removal of being deemed a trespass. The provisions of this paragraph shall not be construed as an obligation on the part of the Declarant or Association to mow, clear, cut, or prune any Lot nor to provide garbage for trash removal services.
I. Street Cleaning. The Declarant shall have the right from time to time to cause the streets in the Subdivision to be cleaned to assess all Lot Owners engaged in construction on or within thirty (30) days prior to the cleaning for pro rata share of the last of the street cleaning. In the event the Township or any other governmental authority issues the warning or ticket for a violation of ordinance or law on any Lot, Declarant shall have the right to remediate the item for which a warning or ticket is issued the assess the Owner of the Lot (or the land contract for an option purchaser of the Lot from Declarant) on which the work was done for the cost of the same. Any such cost assessed shall be a lien on the Lot assessed as provided in Article V of this Declaration. 
J. Unsightly Conditions. It shall be the responsibility of each Lot Owner to prevent the development of any unclean, unsightly or unkept conditions of building or ground on such Lot which tend to substantially decrease the beauty of the Subdivision as a whole or any specific area thereof. No lawn ornaments, sculptures or statues shall be placed or permitted to remain on any Lot. 
K. Driveways and Garages. The location of all driveways shall be approved by the Architectural Control Committee prior to construction. All driveways shall be paved with concrete and shall be completed prior to occupancy of the Dwelling to be served by such driveway, except to the extent the delayed or prohibited by strikes or adverse weather conditions, in which event, such paving shall be completed within sixty (60) days after the termination of such strike or adverse weather conditions. Front entry garages may be used for two (2) car garages, only; i.e,, no front entry, three (3) car garages shall be erected or maintained. The Architectural Control Committee shall determine whether a proposed, three (3) car garage has front or side entry. 
L. Sidewalks. Each Lot in the Subdivision shall at the time of construction on a Dwelling thereon also have constructed and installed thereon a 4” thick concrete sidewalk, 5’0” in width, located 1’0” from the front property line of the Lot and running within the public right-of-way parallel to the adjoining street at the front of the Lot. Each corner Lot shall have two (2) intersecting sidewalks constructed and installed on it in accordance with the specifications of the previous sentence, with one sidewalk running parallel with the adjoining street at the front of the Lot and the other sidewalk running parallel with the adjoining street at the side of the Lot. Each sidewalk on a Lot shall tie in with the sidewalk existing or to be built on the adjacent Lot(s), if any, and in the case of corner Lots shall also connect into the adjoining street perpendicular to the sidewalk. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, all sidewalks shall be constructed and installed with the requirements of the Board of Oakland County Road Commissioners and the Township. Sidewalks located in the public right-of-way immediately adjacent to a Lot shall be maintained, repaired or replaced by the Lot Owner of the Lot to which the sidewalk is immediately adjacent, not by the Association or any governmental entity. In order to provide for flexibility in maintaining, repairing and replacing the sidewalks in the Subdivision, the Association, acting through its Board of Directors and after the affirmative vote of more than two-thirds (2/3) of the Lot Owners, may accept responsibility to maintain, repair and/or replace sidewalks in the Subdivision. Nothing herein contained, however, shall compel this Association to undertake such responsibility. Any such responsibilities undertaken by the Association shall be charged to the Owners on a reasonably uniform basis as determined by the Board of Directors
and collected in accordance with the assessment procedures established under Article V of this Declaration. 
M. Temporary Structures. Trailers, tents, shacks, tool sheds, barns or any temporary buildings of any design whatsoever are expressly prohibited within this Subdivision and no temporary Dwelling shall be permitted in an unfinished residential building. This shall not prevent the erection of the temporary storage building for materials and supplies to be used in the construction of a Dwelling, and which shall be removed from the premises on completion of the Structure, and shall not prevent use by builder or contractor of trailers for material storage or model offices during the period of construction in the Subdivision, provided the same shall be removed at the completion of such construction. 
N. Signs. No signs of any kind shall be displayed to the public view on any Lot except one (1) professional sign of not more than five (5) square feet advertising the property for sale or rent, which shall comply with the design and color specification attached Exhibit B. Such signs as are allowed must be maintained in good condition at all times and removed on the termination of their use. 
O. Livestock and Poultry. No animals, livestock or poultry a kind shall be raised, bred or kept on any Lot, except dogs, cats or other household pets which may be kept, provided that they are not kept, bred or maintained for any commercial purpose. 
P. Refuse and Stored Materials. No Lot shall be used or maintained as a dumping ground or for outside storage for rubbish, trash, garbage or other materials. Other waste shall be kept in a sanitary container, properly concealed from public view. 
Q. Street Trees and Landscaping. Each lot and owner (including contract and options purchasers a Lots from Declarant) shall plant three (3) street trees on the Lot owner (or purchased on land contract or option from Declarant). All such street trees shall be Norway Maples (summer shade or superform) or other deciduous trees approved in advance by Declarant, and shall be of the minimum size necessary to meet the Township’s street tree requirement for the Lot. All street trees shall be placed in locations approved by the Declarant in its sole discretion. When planted, each street tree shall be equidistant from the other street trees on the Lot and the street trees located (or to be located) on the Lot(s) adjacent to the Lot on which the trees are planted, with the result being that the trees will be roughly 25-30 feet apart. Basic landscaping, including finish grading and sodding, must be completed within ninety (90) days after the closing of the sale of a newly-constructed Dwelling, occupancy, whichever is sooner. If, however, such closing or occupancy occurs after October 1 of any year, the Lot shall be sodded and appropriately landscaped by June 1 of the following year. Each Lot Owner shall be responsible to maintain and replace the three (3) street trees planted in the street right-of-way adjacent to the Owner’s Lot as provided in this paragraph Q. In the event any street tree dies, the Owner of the Lot abutting the right-of-way in which the street tree is planted shall replace the dead tree with a Norway Maple (summer shade or superform) or other deciduous trees approved in advance by Declarant, in the minimum size required by the Township, at the Lot Owner’s sole cost and expense. If the Lot Owner fails to make such a replacement within thirty (30) days after written request to do so from the Association, the Association may replace the tree
and assess the Lot Owner with the cost of replacing the dead tree. Any such special assessment shall be a lien on the Owner’s Lot as provided in Article V of this Declaration. The Association shall not be obligated to replace dead trees pursuant to this paragraph Q, any rights exercised hereunder being entirely at the discretion of the Association. 
R. General Conditions: 
1. No trailers, boats, boat trailers, campers, RVs, junk cars, 
motorcycles, motor homes, commercial vehicles (other than those present temporarily on business for a period not to exceed eight (8) hours). ATVs, snowmobiles, jet skis, other recreational vehicles of any kind, for any trailer used for any type or kind of vehicle may be parked in the Subdivision except within a private attached garage. 
2. No clothes lines or outside drying of laundry shall be permitted. 
3. All mailboxes shall be of the uniform size, color hands same design in compliance with the standards set forth to be attached by 
Declarant as an Exhibit C to this Declaration. All mailboxes shall be located uniformly with reference to the Dwellings in accordance 
with post office requirements. 
4. No solar panel, solar collector or similar device shall be placed, constructed, altered, or maintained on any Lot or placed, 
constructed, altered, or maintained on any Dwelling or Structure. 
5. No exterior antenna receiving devices, or satellite dishes any kind or nature whether freestanding or mounted upon any Dwelling or 
other Structure shall be permitted, unless: (a) the device is the 
so-called “mini-dish” (not to exceed 18 inches in diameter) located in a location that is fully-screened from view and approved by the 
Architectural Control Committee; or (b) the Architectural Control 
Committee determines in its sole discretion that the absence of an outside antenna causing substantial hardship with respect to a 
particular Site. 
6. In ground swimming pools ls be permitted, subject to the prior review and written approval of the Architectural Control Committee. Swimming pools which rise more than one (1) foot above ground 
level shall be permitted. All swimming pool areas shall be 
landscape to minimize the visual impact upon adjacent residences and shall not be visible from the road. All swimming pool 
mechanical equipment will be located in the rear yard of the 
Dwelling, will not extend past the side of the Dwelling, and will be 
fully concealed from view. 
7. No external air conditioning unit shall be placed in or attached to a window or wall of any Dwelling or Structure. No compressor or 
other component of a central air conditioning system (or similar
system, such as a heat pump) shall be so located upon any Lot so as to be visible from the public street upon which such Lot fronts, and, to the extent reasonably possible, all such external equipment shall be so located on any Lot so as to minimize the negative impact thereof on any adjoining Lot, in the terms of noise and appearance. In general, such equipment shall be located at least twelve and one-half (12 ½) feet from Lot boundary line and shall be completely screened by evergreen landscape screening unless an exception is approved by the Architectural Control Committee. 
8. No substantially similar front elevation (in both style and color) of any Dwelling shall be duplicated on any a Lot less than three hundred (300) feet away along the front Lot lines, unless approved by the Architectural Control Committee. Different colors, building material patterns, offsets, roof lines, porches, windows, doors, and ornamental trim shall be used for Dwellings on adjacent Lots to avoid the appearance of repetition. 
9. Basketball hoops and play areas are permitted subject to strict compliance with the following restrictions: 
(a) All basketball hoops shall be on the ground mounted posts located at least thirty (30) feet from the curb of the road(s) adjacent to the Lot. 
(b) The ground mounted post for the basketball hoop shall be located at least five (5) feet the side line of the Lot. 
(c) No florescent or bright colors shall be permitted for either the post or the backboard. The ground mounted post shall be painted black and the backboard of the basketball hoop shall be cleared or smoked. 
10. Dog kennels or runs or other enclosed shelters for permitted animals shall not exceed 150 square feet in size, shall be an integral part of the approved Dwelling, shall be located in the rear of the Dwelling only and shall extend no more than twelve (12) feet beyond the rear of the Dwelling. The location and design of fencing for dog kennels, runs and similar shelters shall be approved by the Architectural Control Committee and, if necessary, the Township. Any such fence shall be made of wood with a height not to exceed four (4) feet. If the fence is visible from a front street or side street, it shall be screened with suitable landscaping, the suitability of which shall be determined by the Architectural Control Committee. Each Lot Owner must keep any such kennel, shelter or run in a clean and sanitary condition.
S. Fences and Walls. No fence or wall which surrounds the perimeter of a Lot shall be permitted. Fences side yard adjoining the public or private street shall not exceed forty-eight (48) inches in height, in all fences shall comply with the provisions of paragraph T of the Article VII. Where such fences abut a Common Area, no fence shall be erected except on condition that a Lot Owner of such Lot regularly cuts, cleans and maintains the area of such a Lot between said fence and the Common Area. Wrought iron and other decorative fencing (but not fencing of the wire type commonly known as “Cyclone Fencing”) may be used on any Lot for the purpose of enclosing a permitted swimming pool, in locations approved by the Committee. Any such approved and permanent fencing shall have a vertical balustrade pattern and no additional ornamentations. All fences are subject to approval by and permitting requirements of the Township and shall not exceed the minimum height permitted by the Township. 
T. Sight Distance at Intersection. No fence, wall, hedge, or shrub planting greater than three (3) feet in height about the roadways shall be placed or permitted to remain on any corner Lot within the triangular area formed by the street property lines and a line connecting them at points thirty (30) feet from the intersection of the street lines, or in the case of a rounded property corner from the intersection of the street property line extended. The same sight line limitations shall apply on any Lot within ten (10) feet from the intersection have a street property line with the edge of the driveway or alley pavement. No tree shall be permitted to remain within such distances of such intersections unless the foliage line is maintained at least ten (10) feet above the ground, or such greater height as is necessary to prevent obstructions of such sight lines. 
U. Utility Easements. Easements for the construction, installation and maintenance of public utilities, and for drainage facilities, are reserved as shown on the recorded Plat. Within all of the foregoing easements, unless the necessary approvals are obtained from the Township and any other appropriate municipal authority, no Structure, planting or other material shall be placed or permitted to remain which may damage or interfere with the installation and maintenance of such service facilities and utilities, including underground electrical and telephone local distribution systems, or which may change, obstruct or retard the flow or direction of water in and through drainage in the easements, nor shall any change, which may obstruct or retard the flow of surface water or be detrimental to the property of others, be made by occupant in the finish grade of any Lot once the established by the builder upon completion construction of the Dwelling thereon. The easement area of each Lot and all improvements on it shall be maintained (in a presentable condition continuously) by the Lot Owner, except for those improvements for which a public authority or utility company is responsible, Lot Owner shall be liable for damage to service facilities and utilities therein, including damage to electric, gas, and telephone distribution lines and facilities therein. Except as otherwise provided herein, each Lot Owner shall maintain the surface area of easements within his property, to keep weeds out, to keep the area free of trash and debris, and to take such action as may be necessary to eliminate or minimize surface erosion.
V. Easement for Birchwood Park County Drain. As shown on the Plat of the Subdivision, certain Lots are subject to perpetual and permanent easement for the Birchwood Park County Drain, which easement shall meet in favor of the Oakland County Drain Commissioner, Birchwood Park Drainage District in the County of Oakland in their respective successors, assigns and transferees (collectively referred to as the “drainage authorities”). The easement for the Birchwood Park County Drain shown on the Plat may not be amended or revoked except with a written approval of the drainage authorities, and further includes the following terms and conditions and where grants the following rights: 
1. The Easement shall be for the purposes of developing, 
establishing, constructing, repairing, maintaining, and deepening, 
cleaning, widening, and performing any associated construction 
activities and grading in connection with, type of drainage facilities 
or storm drains, in any size, form, shape or capacity. 
2. The drainage authorities, and any of them, shall have the right to sell, assign, transfer or convey this easement to any other 
governmental unit. 
3. No Owner in the Subdivision shall build or convey to others any permission to build any permanent Structures in or on the 
easement areas for the Birchwood Park County Drain, as shown on the Plat. 
4. No Owner in the Subdivision shall build or plant in or on the area covered by the easement any type of Structure, fixture or object, or engage in any activity or take any action, or convey any property 
interest for right, that would in any way either actually or threaten to impair, obstruct, or adversely affect the rights of the drainage 
authorities under the easement. 
5. The drainage authorities and their agents, contractors and 
designated representatives shall have right to entry on, and to gain access to, the easement property. 
6. All Owners in this Subdivision release of drainage authorities from any and all claims to damages in any way arising from or incident to the construction and maintenance of a drain or sewer or otherwise rising from or incident to the exercise by the drainage authorities of their rights under said easement, and all Owners Covenant not to 
sue the drainage authorities for any such damages. 
The rights granted to the drainage authorities under this Article VII; paragraph V may not be amended without the express written consent of the drainage authorities. Any purported amendment for modification of the rights granted under to the drainage authorities shall be void and without legal effect unless agreed to in writing by the drainage authorities, their successors or assigns.
W. Public Utilities. All public utilities such as water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, gas mains, electric and telephone local subdivision distribution lines, and all connections to same, either private or otherwise, shall be installed underground; provided, however, that the above ground transformers, pedestals, cable and/or other feeder pole lines, and other of above ground electric and telephone utility equipment associated with or deemed necessary by the Detroit Edison Company in Michigan Bell Telephone Company, or the Declarant, for underground utility installations and distribution systems, and surface and offsite open drainage channels and facilities, as well as street lighting stanchions, shall be permitted. In addition, the Subdivision and each Lot there is subject to the terms of Agreement and to the terms of an Easement Grant and Declaration of Restrictions, in each case between the Declarant and the Detroit Edison Company and the Michigan Bell Telephone Company, which instruments may now be or will hereafter be recorded in the Oakland County Records, and in each case relating to the installation and maintenance of the underground electric and communication service and facilities, and which instruments are, by this reference, incorporated herein. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the provisions in requirements of this paragraph W Article VII shall not apply to utility poles lines existing as of the date hereof. 
X. Declarant’s Rights in Furtherance of Development and Sales. None of the restrictions contained in this Article VII shall apply to the commercial activities or signs or billboards of the Declarant with respect to unsold Lots owned by Declarant. Anything herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding, the Declarant, its successors and assigns, it’s or their agents, employees and sales representatives may use and occupy any Lot or Dwelling built in the Subdivision as a sales office for the handling of sales of Lots and/or Dwellings in said Subdivision or other lands in the Township owned by the Declarant, until all of the Lots and/or Dwellings to be built on said lands shall have been sold, further, may construct fences otherwise in violation of paragraph S Article VII, above in front of, or alongside of, model or display houses during such sales period; provided, however, that such time as such model or display house is sold, any such fence or portion thereof otherwise in violation of paragraph S article VII, above shall be removed by the builder of such model or display house.
ARTICLE VIII 
ARCHITECTURAL CONTROL COMMITTEE 
Except as otherwise expressly provided herein, the Architectural Control Committee shall have exclusive jurisdiction of the rights of approval and enforcement set forth in this Declaration. The Declarant shall have exclusive right to appoint and remove all Members of the Architectural Control Committee in its sole discretion until such time as certificates of occupancy have been issued for Dwellings on hundred (100%) percent of the Lots in the Subdivision. There shall be no surrender of this right prior to the issuance of certificates of occupancy of Dwellings in the hundred (100%) percent of the Lots in the Subdivision, except in written instrument in recordable form executed by Declarant and specifically assigning to the Association the power to appoint and remove Members of the Architectural Control Committee. From and after the date of such assignment or later expiration of Declarant’s exclusive power of appointment removal, the Architectural Control Committee shall be appointed by the Board of Directors of the Association, and Declarant shall have no further responsibilities with respect to any matters of approval or enforcement set forth herein. The Architectural Control Committee shall consist of at least one but no more than three persons. Neither Declarant or any Member of the Architectural Control Committee shall be compensated from assessments collected from the Members of the Association for their time expended in architectural control activities.
ARTICLE IX 
EXCULPATION FROM LIABILITY 
In no event shall the party has the right to impose liability on, or otherwise contest judicially, the Declarant or the Association for any decision of the Declarant or the Association (or alleged failure of the Declarant or the Association to make a decision) relative to the approval or disapproval of a Structure or any aspect or other matter as to which Declarant reserves the right to approve or waive under this Declaration. The approval of the Declarant of a Structure or other matter shall be construed as a representation or warranty that the Structure or matter is in conformity with the ordinance or other requirements of the Township or any other governmental authority. Any obligation or duty to ascertain any such nonconformities, or to advise the Lot Owner or any other person of the same (even as known), is hereby disclaimed.
ARTICLE X 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 
A. Duration. The Declaration and the Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions herein created shall run with and bind the land, and shall inure to the benefit of and be enforceable by the Owner of any land subject to the Declaration, their respective legal representatives, heirs, successors and assigns, for a term of thirty (30) years from the date of this Declaration is recorded, after which time said Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions shall be automatically extended for successive periods of ten (10) years unless an instrument signed and agreed to by the then Owners of two-thirds (2/3) of the Lots has been recorded, changing said Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions in whole or in part; provided, however, that no such agreement and instrument of change shall be effective unless made and recorded at least six (6) months in advance of the effective date of such change, and unless written notice of proposed agreement and instrument of change is sent to every Owner at least (90) days in advance of any action taken. 
B. Amendment by Declarant. As provided in Article III, paragraph B, Declarant has reserved the right in the exercise of its sole and absolute discretion to amend this Declaration at any time and from time to time until earlier to occur of: (a) such time as title to not less than ninety (90%) percent of the Lots in the Subdivision and the lots in any other subdivision combined with the Subdivision pursuant to Article II have been conveyed by the Declarant’s delivery of deeds thereto; and (b) such time as Declarant shall execute and deliver to the Association a written instrument executed by Declarant specifically relinquishing Declarant’s exclusive voting rights pursuant to Article III, paragraph B of this Declaration. So long as Great Oaks Subdivision Limited Partnership owns legal title to a Lot in the Subdivision, no amendment of this Declaration will be effective with the prior written consent of Great Oaks Subdivision Limited Partnership. 
C. Notices. Any notice required to be sent to any number of the provisions of this Declaration shall be deemed to have been properly sent one mailed, postpaid, to the last known address of the person who appears as Owner on the records of the Oakland County, Michigan Register of Deeds Office at the time of such mailing. 
D. Enforcement. Enforcement of these covenants and restrictions shall be by any proceeding at law no equity against any person or persons violating or attempting to violate any covenant or restriction, either to restrain violation or to recover damages, and against the land to enforce any lien created by these covenants; and failure by the Association or any Owner to enforce any covenant or restriction herein contained show no event be deemed a waiver of the right to do so thereafter. 
E. Severability. Invalidation any one or more of these covenants or restrictions by judgment what court order shall in no way affect any other provisions what shall remain in full force and effect.